# Contributing

## How to contribute

### Help reporting a bug

Before submitting a bug, make sure that you have googled about your problems, and search for it in our [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/git-tex/tex-make/issues).

Since this project just makes use of others tools: `Makefile`, `ChkTeX`, `latexindent.pl`... so maybe the problems come from them (no offense). Or probably I have configured them wrong.

Please use the [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/git-tex/tex-make/issues) to report bugs.

### Make some changes

If you want to change something, have new features, please create an issue first. In that issue, we can discuss to reach an agreement or cancel it.

Anyway, no matter what you are doing - fixing a bug, creating a new feature... please create an issue first.

### Submitting Pull Request

Before submitting your pull request, make sure that the following has been done:

-   Your code follow our [Code of Conduct](./CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md)
-   Test on our sample document.
-   Run the linter.
-   Format the source code.

### Contribution Prerequisites

-   The latest version of `TeX Live`.
-   GNUmake.
-   Git and experience with it.

## Codebase structure

(The following structure is created by [`tree`](<https://wikipedia.org/wiki/Tree_(command)>))

```
.
├── chapter0
│   └── chapter0.tex
├── chapter1
│   ├── chapter1.tex
│   ├── section1
│   │   └── section1.tex
│   ├── section2
│   │   └── section2.tex
│   └── section3
│       └── section3.tex
├── .chktexrc
├── CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md
├── CONTRIBUTING.md
├── custom.cls
├── .editorconfig
├── .gitignore
├── indentconfig.yaml
├── .latexmkrc
├── LICENSE
├── main.tex
├── Makefile
└── README.md
```

At the root, we have the "entry file" `main.tex`, `custom.cls`, `indentconfig.yaml`, `Makefile`, `.chktexrc`, `.editorconfig` - which are very important while using the template.

I call `main.tex` the _root file_.

The content of the sample document are splitted into chapters, sections and put in the corresponding directories.

## Features

Formatting, compiling, linting, cleaning... all of these features are brought to you by `Makefile`

In your shell (terminal), use the command: `make <target>`.

The `Makefile` file, in this repository, provides the following targets:

-   `all`:
    -   This is the default target if no target is provided.
    -   In this case, `make all` or `make` compile and build the whole document.
-   `cleanbak`:
    -   `make cleanbak` remove `bak` files that generated by `latexindent.pl`.
-   `cleangit`:
    -   In this case, `make clean` removes untracked files and files that ignored by `Git`.
-   `chktex`:
    -   `make chktex` lints your code, finds possible errors in your code - forces you to write your code in a consistent style. The configuration for this is contained in `.chktexrc`.
-   `formatall`:
    -   This formats your source code by using `latexindent.pl`, which is configurable with `indentconfig.yaml` file. Just like `chktex`, you should format your code to ensure consistency.
-   `updatecls`:
    -   The template repository provides its own `.cls` file. In order to use this `.cls` anywhere, this target copies it to an appropriate place.
-   `%.pdf`:
    -   `make chapter0/chapter0.pdf` will build `.pdf` from `chapter0/chapter0.tex`. This enables preview.
-   `%.clean`:
    -   `make chapter0/chapter0.clean` will remove auxiliary and output files of `chapter0/chapter0.tex`.
-   `%.cleanaux`:
    -   `make chapter0/chapter0.cleanaux` will remove auxiliary of `chapter0/chapter0.tex`.
-   `%` (pattern rule):
    -   For those who are not so familiar with `Makefile`: you might consider `%` as a wildcard for any string. More specific, if you run `make <target>`, where `<target>` doesn't match `all`, `clean`, `formatall`,... it will use this pattern rule `%`.
    -   In this case, the pattern rule is used to compile subfiles of the document. I have splitted the whole document into chapters, chapters to smaller sections and put them in the corresponding directories.
    -   This rule depends **heavily** on how I organize the project structure and the packages I use (`standalone`, `import`). See **The Ideas Behind**(next) to understand the idea.
    -   For examples:
    -   To compile `chapter0`, run:
    ```shell
    make chapter0 -B
    ```
    -   `make` won't run if the target name is identical to any directory path or file name so `-B` is required.
    -   To compile `section2` of `chapter1`, run:
    ```shell
    make chapter1/section2 -B
    ```

## The Ideas Behind

### `\usepackage[subpreambles=true]{standalone}` is awesome

It is very common to break large file into smaller ones. Before created this project, I had to find out how to create and work with a `multiple files project with TeX`.

I obtained some solutions for that, which include:

-   `\input{}`
-   `\include{}`
-   [`subfiles`](https://ctan.org/pkg/subfiles)
-   [`standalone`](https://ctan.org/pkg/standalone) and [`import`](https://ctan.org/pkg/import)

I have chosen `standalone` and `import` packages for this project. But first, let me summarize the advantages and disadvantages of these solutions (from **StackOverflow** and **Overleaf**):

-   `\input{filename}`: this is equivalent to the content the file.
-   `\include{filename}`: almost identical to `\input{filename}`, but it does a `\clearpage` before and after the command.

`\input{}` can be nested, but `\include{}` cannot.

Both `\input{}` and `\include{}` are not usable for files that has preamble or `\begin{document}`. So you have to provide all the packages you need in the root file.

-   `subfiles` package allows us to declare documentclass and use `\begin{document}` in the subfiles but the subfiles can not have their own preambles. Subfiles can be nested but have to point to the root file.
-   `import` provide `\import{path}{filename}` and `\subimport{path}{filename}`. Together with `standalone` package, this package allows the subfiles to have their own preambles. The subfiles don't have to specify the path to the root file.

So that's why I have chosen `standalone` and `import` packages. It is the most flexible solution in my opinion. With these packages, I can:

1.  Build PDF for just the part that I work with, not the entire document.
2.  I can freely load the packages that my part needs.

But of course, this solution has caveat - _performance_. With a quite large number of subfiles, you have to specify the variable `$max_repeat` (which is set default to 5) in `.latexmkrc` - This is up to you.

But for now, I don't mind it. Maybe someday, the project will serve both solution: `\input` and `standalone`, `\input` for the whole document, `standalone` for parts of it.

### Chapters, Sections and so on

As you have seen the codebase structure, I put the content of the chapters in `chapter{number}` directories.
And each directories has its own "entry file", which might import smaller subfiles.

At first, I wanted the name of the entry file will always be `main.tex`, and it is ok, and the recipe in `Makefile` can be simpler. But I don't want get confused between various of entry files with the same name so I decided that the entry file and its directory will have the same name.
